The Governing Body
and the Writing Committee
take the responsibility
of translating God’s Word very seriously.
As we will see in this report,
the Bible translation
done by Jehovah’s people
has played a key role
in making Jehovah’s Word
widely available in simple, clear language
that touches the hearts of sincere people.
In 2021, we reached an exciting milestone.
The New World Translation  is now available
in whole or in part
in well over 200 languages.
Let’s look at a few key landmarks
along the way.
In 1950, my mother and her family
were at Yankee Stadium
when Brother Knorr
released the New World Translation.
It was something unforgettable for them.
Years later, when I heard
the recording of Brother Knorr’s talk,
I understood why.
But now by Jehovah’s undeserved kindness,
I have the extreme pleasure of releasing
to the international Theocracy’s Increase
Assembly of Jehovah’s Witnesses,
the New World Translation
of the Christian Greek Scriptures.
No wonder he said:
‘It gives me extreme pleasure
to release the New World Translation.’
Brother Knorr was overjoyed
to release a translation
that was not tainted with false religion
and that restored Jehovah’s holy name
to its rightful place.
And it was translated
by anointed brothers of Christ.
Back then, most English-speaking people
used the King James  Bible.
It used old-fashioned words
like “thee” and “thou”
that were hard to understand.
The New World Translation
was so much clearer.
And it restored Jehovah’s name
to its rightful place
7,000 times.
The same need existed
in other languages too.
So work began
to produce the New World Translation
in additional languages.
It was a slow, painstaking process.
Some early editions
of the New World Translation
were taking over 20 years to complete.
But since 1989,
the Governing Body
always assigns a team of translators
who encourage each other to keep moving
through the 66 books
and over 31,000 verses.
When a translator learns
that he has been assigned
to work with a Bible translation team,
he is overwhelmed.
One said: “I couldn’t sleep for many nights.
I even had nightmares.”
It is a tremendous challenge
to fully understand
the meaning of every part of the text
before he starts translation.
Imagine trying to replicate a food recipe,
but you do not have the original ingredients.
You need to use substitutes
but still create the same taste and flavor.
Translating the Bible is something like that.
You cannot use the original ingredients
—the Hebrew and Greek words.
However, using the words in your language,
you want to re-create the same meaning
and emotional impact as the original verse.
The Governing Body recognizes
what a responsible project this is,
so they arrange specialized training
to guide translators
and to assure them of Jehovah’s support.
More than 130,000 questions
from Bible translators have been answered
in the past 30 years or so.
And these answers are not only provided
to the teams that ask the questions
but to all Bible translation teams.
This approach made
the translators’ work much easier,
but the focus on Bible translation
was about to intensify.
The Governing Body became aware
of some difficult problems
that some of our brothers were facing,
particularly with certain language groups.
You had just one Bible
for a family or group
or even for a congregation,
and they had to share that one Bible.
In addition to that,
some languages did have
new translations of the Bible
that were available,
but they not only took Jehovah’s name out
but they replaced it
with the name of a local deity.
So back in 2004,
the Governing Body decided
to expand Bible translation work
so that more and more languages
could have the New World Translation.
With the Governing Body’s clear direction,
Bible translation picked up speed.
Then came
the landmark 2013 annual meeting.
And we’re pleased to announce
at this annual meeting
that the work
on this revision recently was completed.
You don’t have to wait at all!
Here it is!
The revised edition
of the New World Translation.
We think you’re going to find
that this application
is going to be
the ideal digital companion
to the Bible
that you now have in your hand.
The simpler 2013 English text
sets a pattern for translators
because it places greater emphasis
on meaning rather than on words.
Let’s look at 1 Peter 5:2.
I’m going to read it
from the previous edition
of the New World Translation,
and on the screen
you’ll see the revised version:
“Shepherd the flock of God in your care,
not under compulsion, but willingly.”
Did you notice anything different?
“Serving as overseers” has been added.
We never had those words
in the New World Translation  before
because the word
translated “serving as overseers”
didn’t appear in the Greek text
that was used as the basis for it.
However, since then, an older copy
of 1 Peter was uncovered,
and it does contain the word.
It appears that the word was removed
from some later manuscripts
of the fourth century.
Why would anyone remove the word?
Scholars have suggested a possibility.
In verse 1, Peter addresses the elders,
and then in verse 2, he calls them overseers.
That proves that the same person
can be both an elder and an overseer.
The Catholic church disagrees.
In the Catholic church,
an elder is equated with a priest
and an overseer is much more important.
He’s equated with a bishop,
and to them, a priest
—a lowly priest—
can’t also be bishop.
So when the Catholic copyists
came to verses 1 and 2,
they must have thought
that the church couldn’t be wrong,
so the Bible must be wrong.
And they took it out.
To Jehovah’s people,
if there’s a difference
between what we believe
and what the Bible says,
we will change.
We leave the Bible alone.
When I think back to the very evening
when I realized
that I had been given the truth,
I recall thinking to myself,
‘Jehovah’s Witnesses have the truth,
and so they must have
the very best Bible translation.’
And so that was the first thing I asked for.
I wanted my own copy
of the New World Translation.
And so now when I have the privilege
to release a new language edition
of the New World Translation
and I see the joy
on the faces of the friends,
I can connect directly to that
because that’s exactly how I felt.
I just love releasing
the New World Translation
in another language.
Sometimes it’s very exciting
because the brothers don’t think they’re able
to even receive the printed copy
in time for the release.
In a couple of cases,
they received the shipment of Bibles
just the day before the release talk.
So you can imagine,
the brothers were totally excited,
and then when they received it,
that excitement was really enhanced.
The day I had the privilege to release
the Ewe New World Translation  in Ghana,
we traveled to the Assembly Hall
for the program.
As we neared the Assembly Hall,
here there were many people
with little stands alongside the road
trying to sell things to the brothers.
Many were selling Bibles
because our brothers
did not have the New World Translation.
It made me so happy
to think that this was the last day
our brothers would be forced to buy
an inferior-quality Bible translation.
Now they would have
the New World Translation.
Every copy of the New World Translation
that is printed or downloaded
has the potential to change someone’s life.
Our preaching and teaching work
is more important than ever.
Jehovah provides the tools we need.
As we use them, we make Bible truths
widely available in hundreds of languages.
We help people to understand the truth
and let it reach their hearts.
“Thus in a mighty way,
the word of Jehovah
[keeps] growing and prevailing.”